CHAPTER 6 Sinking of the Titanic
by M.GELAN

The sinking of the Titanic is one of the greatest tragedies in human history. The following is a very exciting account of the night on which that tragedy occurred.
In the whole story of distress at sea there is no more catastrophic chapter than the sinking of the Titanic with the loss of over 1,500 lives. The Leviathan's doom in the Atlantic icefield off Cape Race on that cold, beautiful, starlit night of 15 April 1912, her great steel plates ripped like tinfoil by the fangs of an iceberg, shocked and bewildered the world.
The "ship that could not sink" had gone, closed in upon by the fathoms she had been designed to ride with easy arrogance, dominant and indestructible; the biggest and safest vessel ever built by man—queen of the seas! And she was humbled and destroyed, not by the spit and fury of a tempest, but by a sea as placid as an inland lake; man's genius, man's wealth, man's enterprise, halted by an enemy of no more substance than frozen water, steel bending in defeat to ice.
The Titanic was on her maiden voyage to America. She was the envy and admiration of the maritime nations of the world. In speed, in comfort, in beauty, in equipment, she was a masterpiece. Everything about her was big and fascinating. Ten decks rose tier on tier! Passengers could walk four and a half miles without exploring all of her wonders. Among her amenities were a Parisian cafe, a Jacobean dining room seating 500, a swimming pool, squash racket courts, a gymnasium, a library, sun parlours and tearooms, and a huge ballroom with hidden lighting.
For 1912 the Titanic was a miracle of luxury and a magnet for millionaires, several of whom, both American and British, were among the passengers. It was estimated at the time that the total wealth represented by the first-class passengers was in the region of $50,000,000. Some paid as much as £870 for the trip. Altogether, the Titanic had on board some 2,200 souls, including a crew of nearly 900, and over 100 children. Only about 700 were ever to sight land again.
The fateful night of 15 April was bitterly cold. Not the slightest puff of breeze, however, ruffled a flat sea. The Titanic was doing between twenty-one and twenty-two knots without vibration. There was every indication, on her performance, that she was easily capable of setting up an Atlantic record, though no attempt was being made to do so. This was the time, not for record-breaking, but for testing and observation. Already, from captain to deck-boy, the crew of the Titanic were satisfied that their ship was supreme. So, too, was Mr. Joseph Bruce Ismay, chairman and managing director of the White Star Line, who was among the passengers.
The passengers themselves, after four days at sea, were in high spirits. They had indulged in all the many joys afforded by the wonder ship, and now they were anticipating the thrill of New York's welcome. There was music and dancing, card-playing, mild flirtations and all the social whirligig of the luxury liner.
On the bridge there was the customary vigilance. It was well known to captain and officers that the Titanic was approaching the regions where ice might be expected, regions, nevertheless, which had been navigated in safety by passenger liners time and time again. Formal messages had been received by radio that there was ice about, but nothing to the effect that there were any dangerous bergs in the Titanic's direct course.
Second Officer Lightoller had taken the special precaution of giving a special warning to the two look-out men in the ship's crow's nest. He did so, not because of any special fears, but because in such a calm sea the presence of ice would not be betrayed by a disturbance of the water. At ten o'clock, satisfied that all was well, Lightoller handed over the bridge to First Officer Murdoch and went below. Murdoch was accompanied in the watch by Fourth Officer Boxhall and Sixth Officer Moody, with Quartermaster Robert Hichens at the wheel.
The ship sped through the night, her lights twinkling against those of the stars. So cold was it that few ventured on deck. The passengers gradually dwindled away to their cabins. Only a few remained in the public rooms over cards, gossip or a drink. And on the bridge there was little sound but the almost indiscernible hum of the engines, the half-hourly clang of the ship's bells in the wheelhouse, followed by the cry from the look-out men in the crow's nest, "All's well!"
At about eleven-forty came the shock that reverberated round the world. The officers on the bridge were staggered to hear three gongs sounded from the crow's nest, the signal that something lay dead ahead. Then came the dramatic cry, "Iceberg right ahead, sir!"
A berg! The hearts of the watch froze to the temperature of the sea. First Officer Murdoch had seen the greenish-white mountain of destruction looming out of space almost as soon as the look-outs. Without hesitation he gave the order, "Hard-a-starboard—full speed astern," in the vain hope that he could swing the ship's bow clear, and then her stern. But it was not to be. The Titanic received a death blow.
Ice tumbled upon her decks. Below the water line the jagged bulk of the berg stove in six of the water-tight compartments. No ship of even twice the strength could have resisted that onslaught. The Titanic's keel was so ripped and her side so buckled that her fate was sealed from this moment. Sooner or later this night the "unsinkable" leviathan was going to sink.
First Officer Murdoch now stopped the engines and operated another lever designed to close the water-tight doors. Captain Smith came from the chart-room on to the bridge. His eyes were anxious, his face already drawn, but his voice and hands were steady. "Close the emergency doors," he said quietly. "They are already closed, sir," said Murdoch. "Then send to the carpenter and tell him to sound the ship," was the captain's next order. But instinct and the commutator (which shows in which direction the ship is listing) told him the worst.
Next came the order, "All hands on deck," and both watches came tumbling up from below, many of the men only scantily dressed, rubbing the sleep from their eyes. Shipwreck is the last thing in the world expected by the crew of a modern liner; to the men of the Titanic it still seemed impossible even after they had learnt that the vessel had torn herself on the berg. Orders were orders, however, and they rushed to the boat deck.
There was a deafening roar as the engineers began blowing the boilers down, so strident a din that few could hear themselves speak. Below decks the pumps were operating in a futile battle against hopeless odds. In the wireless-room Phillips, the chief wireless operator, was feverishly tapping out the SOS. From the bridge distress rockets were being sent up. Minute by minute they streaked into the sky. The lights of a vessel could be seen a few miles away. Captain Smith and his officers were certain that assistance from this quarter would come quickly and decisively, that every soul aboard his vessel would be transferred to safety. Their hope and their faith was to be shaken. Neither rockets nor radio brought the distant ship, the Californian, to their aid. Its lights dwindled and died away. Only the stars shone on.
The first effect of the impact on the passengers was peculiar. In the card-room they actually continued, for a time, with their games. Many of those enjoying their "goodnight" drinks speculated jocularly as to "what the fuss was about." Those who were already asleep were awakened by a slight jar or by the sudden and unusual cessation of the engines. They left their cabins, not in fear, but out of curiosity. On deck they met in groups and showered on each other torrents of questions, shouting above the din.
Suddenly the roar of escaping steam ceased. Born of the silence came an awful apprehension. They knew now that there was danger. They saw men working at the boat falls. Sailors shouted to them to fetch their lifebelts. They saw the rockets streaking heavenwards. The word "ice" cut deep into their fears.
Even so, their confidence in this mighty vessel was still not entirely shaken. She was unsinkable. They had been told so. To add to their feeling of false security the story spread that the passengers were to be taken off in the boats purely as a precautionary measure and would in due course return. Little did they know during those moments how minute by minute the water was creeping up and the ship settling down. The band began to play—lively, lilting rag-time airs. Quietly and efficiently the crew went about their duties.
"Women and children first" had been a joker's cry for years. On the boat deck of the Titanic that night it was a grim and earnest command. Without melodrama, almost without threat, the law of the sea was enforced. Few of the men aboard attempted to evade it. One attempt had a touch more of comedy than of cowardice. A handful of foreigners were found concealed under the thwarts of a boat—which they promptly vacated at the point of an empty revolver! In most cases a few stern words, a glance of rebuke, sufficed to stem the inclination of weak men to think first of themselves. It is true, nevertheless, to say that a number of such men did occupy positions in the boats to their discredit and shame. All that can be said in their favour is that for several curious reasons some of the boats were being lowered only partially filled.
In the wireless-cabin, Phillips, continued to quest over the ether for aid, tapping out the S.O.S. time and time again, giving the ship's position. A number of vessels, including the Olympic responded, and the nearest of all, the Carpathian, a Cunard liner, intimated that she was on her way to the rescue.
Both Phillips and his junior, Harold Bride, remained at the post of duty long after they had been released. Captain Smith himself looked into their cabin, with the firm words, "Men, you have done your duty. You can do no more. Abandon your cabin now. It is every man for himself. Look out for yourselves. I release you. That's the way it is at this kind of time-every man for himself." But the S.O.S. continued to go out.
In that little wireless-cabin on the Titanic, incidentally, was enacted a little drama more akin to the shipwreck of fiction. Bride, the junior officer who had fixed a lifebelt around Phillips as he sat at the keyboard, returned from a visit to the deck to find a "stoker or some body" attempting to relieve the wireless chief of his only hope of safety. Let the young Bride describe the sequel in his own words. "Suddenly I felt a passion not to let that man die a decent sailor's death. I wished he might have stretched a rope or walked a plank. I did my duty ... I hope I finished him. I don't know. We left him on the floor of the wireless room, and he wasn't moving." But not until the boat deck was awash did these two heroes quit their post. Phillips perished, killed, it is believed, by exposure but Bride survived. Later, when rescued by the Carpathian, cripple and on crutches took his share of duty in the radio cabin of the ship that had saved him.
P
One by one the Titanic's boats were loaded, lowered and rowed away. There apprehension of the suction that would occur when the great vessel took the final plu One thing was now obvious: that hundreds would be left behind when all the boats had gone. Even if each had been packed to its utmost capacity there would not have no room for many more than a thousand. Many accepted their fate with nonchalance. Others prepared to jump into the icy water, trusting to Providence and their lifebelts. There were stoics and fatalists together on that slanting deck. One amazing feature of the last act was the refusal of many of the women to leave their menfolk. Even when attempts were made forcibly to induce them to enter the boats they struggled for release, pleading to benefit
alone.
A strange and touching incident was the determination of Mr. and Mrs. Isidore Straus, the millionaire and his wife, not to be separated in death. Time and again Mrs Straus was requested to take her place in a boat: time and again she refused. "We are people, Isidore, and we will die together." Ultimately they were seen to drown together they had wished. In strange contrast was the fate of another millionaire pair-Color and Mrs. J.J. Astor. Their honeymoon in Egypt had only recently ended. Now his brio was ill, and the colonel quietly asked if he could accompany her in a boat to protect h As quietly came the answer, "No." The boat was lowered, the colonel standing to salute, and the end of their love story. Mrs. Astor was saved, but her husband perished, going down with the ship, it is believed, by the side of W.T. Stead, the world famous editor of the Saturday Review. Yet another strong personality on that deck of doom was Major Butt, an A.D.C. to the American President. As he helped women to safety he was seen to raise his hat, even when the water was lapping around his ankles.
As the last of the boats were getting away, as the Titanic's bows were sinking deeper, her stern rising higher, the band switched from light music to hymn tunes. To many that was the irrefutable signal that the end was near. As the boats drew steadily away, there stole to them across the water, under the stars, the tune the whole world knows and
reverences:
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!
E'en though it be a cross
That raiseth me:
Still all my song shall be,
Nearer my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee.

These bandsmen were heroes. "Nothing," said a survivor, "could have been more superb than the courage of these men, knowing that they were facing death, but playing to assure and comfort us. Their courage was equal to that of the captain, officers and crew. It was magnificent." Those on the deck of the floundering Titanic were now coming very near to death. The stars above. The sea below. Eternity beyond. Here and there a few huddled groups joined chorus in singing the lovely words of the hymn that will now forever be associated with the greatest sea disaster of all. Those in the boats, as they hoard the rise and fall of each cadence, wondered that those in such peril should exhibit Och faith and such fortitude.
Now the music fades, the singing dies away. All the boats are gone. For hundreds all hope is gone, too. The Titanic tips farther forward, and a surge of water rushes as high as the bridge. Many are swept into the sea. A few escape to temporary safety farther aft. According to a reliable witness, Captain Smith was thrown violently from the bridge into 
the sea. He picked up a baby in the water and swam with it to a boat. When he handed the infant aboard, he was urged to climb into the craft himself. He refused, saying that h would swim to a piece of wreckage nearby. He was not seen again. The last words he had
been heard to speak on the Titanic were a terse cry through his megaphone to those the deck below him-"Be British!" He was, to the core.
Bravely British, too, were those engineers who perished to a man a hundred feet more below the boat deck. They kept the dynamics going to the last. Their plight, when the water gushed through into the bowels of the ship, or the boilers burst, sending out clouds of scalding steam, is terrible to contemplate.
Soon the Titanic was at an angle of forty-five degrees. Those who were clinging and huddled aft began to realise the inevitability of their end unless they acted quickly. Without hesitation a number of them dived into a sea, the temperature of which was well below freezing point, hoping to be picked up by a lifeboat or a raft, or at least to find the opportunity of clinging on to wreckage. For a strong or lucky swimmer such a dive meant a reasonable chance of being saved: for the weakling, death! It was a fair gamble. Why more did not take it is one of the riddles of human nature in adversity. It is probably a fact that right until the final dive some believed that the aft water-tight compartments of the Titanic would keep the ship afloat.
As the vessel tilted higher still the giant forward funnel crashed among the swimmers in the water. Almost at the same time with an awe-inspiring roar, boilers and machinery left their foundations and smashed madly through the bulwarks. Grand staircase, Parisian cafe, Jacobean dining-room, luxury cabins, became the playground of the sea.
In her last minutes the Titanic stood almost perpendicular out of the water, an uncanny colossus of the night, silhouetted against the star-spangled sky, her rows of lights burning steadily, brilliantly. Even desperate swimmers and boats racing to escape the suction, paused at the awesome spectacle, so frightening, so noble, so bitter. Suddenly all her lights went out. The black shadow that was the Titanic stood just a little while as though reluctant to go, then slipped slowly away beneath the claiming water. The "unstable ship" was gone.
A tense, split second of silence, after that rose a noise more disturbing than the scream of wild Atlantic sea vultures. It was the wail of tortured souls, cries that to this day are seared indelibly on the minds of the survivors.
The sea was thick with heads and bodies. Those who, right until the end, had stuck the after-deck and stern of the sinking ship were now floundering, drowning, caning frantically for help that would never reach them.
Those in the lifeboats and on the rafts did not turn back. In the first place they had feared the suction. Now, if they returned to the rescue, the peril would be overcroving and panic. As it was, they were being pestered and burdened and their safety was threatened by swimmers who had jumped off the deck earlier on.
Colonel Gracie, of the United States Army, was just one of these, but his experiences are typical of many. "Dying men and women all around me were crying and moaning piteously," he said on his return to the States. "One of the Titanic's funnels separated and fell apart near me, scattering the bodies in the water. I saw bodies everywhere, and all that came within reach I clung to". Eventually, after a desperate struggle, he succeeded in boarding a raft. "Soon the raft became so full that it seemed as if she would sink if any more came on board her. The crew, for their self-preservation, therefore, had to refuse to permit any more to clamber on. This was the most pathetic and horrible sight of all. The piteous cries of those around rose in my ears and I shall remember them until my dying day. 'Hold on to what you have, old boy,' we shouted. Many of those whom we refused answered, as they went to their deaths, "Good luck! God bless you!" We passed the night with the water washing over and burying the raft deep in water. Never was there a moment when our prayers did not rise up. Men who seemed long ago to have forgotten how to address their Maker recalled the prayers of their childhood and murmured them over and over again."
The Titanic had sunk at about 2.10 a.m., about two and half hours after her impact with the iceberg. For an hour or longer afterwards the night was split by the shrieks of those for whom there was no help. Not until dawn (on 16 April, 1912) did the Carpathia commanded by Captain A.H. Rostron, arrives to bring succour, service and safety. Tithi a few hours every living soul surviving from the Titanic was aboard his ship and destined 99 for New York.

[Postscript-As reported in the Newsweek of 16 September, 1985, scientist using sonar and underwater cameras have now found and photographed the wreck of the atani seventy three years after the great luxury liner went down. The wreck-including baggag and other debris lies on the ocean floor more than two miles down. This scientif triumph has also sparked treasure-hunters' dreams.]


EXERCISES:

Answer the following questions:
1. Why is the Titanic called a leviathan?
2. Why is the Titanic called the 'queen of the seas'?
3. What was the Titanic built of?
4. How did she sink?
5. When did she sink?
6. Where was the ship going to on her maiden voyage?
7. Give a description of the Titanic?

8. Describe the mood of the passengers in the ship before it sank.
9. What precaution did the officers of the ship take against icebergs?
10. Describe the activities of the men and officers in the few initial minutes when the
ship hit the iceberg.
11. Soon after the ship hit the iceberg Captain Smith of the ship showed
(a) panic and indecisiveness.
(b) anxiety yet calmness.
(c) stupidity and inefficiency. (d) hastiness and mistakes.
12. Who were rescued first and how were they rescued?
13. Why have chief wireless operator Phillips and his junior, Bride, been described as 'heroes'?
14. 'In the little wireless-cabin on the Titanic, incidentally, was enacted a little drama more akin to the shipwreck of fiction.' What is the drama referred to here?

15. (a) Did any one on board the sinking ship cry out in fear?
(b) What did some of the men do?
(c) "Many of the women refused to leave their menfolk." Why?

16. Describe the manner in which the following persons died.
(a) Mr. and Mrs. Straus
(b) Colonel Astor
(c) Major Butt

17. Why are the bandsmen described as heroes?
18 Describe the bravery of Captain Smith.
19. 'Bravely British, too, were those engineers who perished to a man a hundred feet or more below the boat deck.'
(a) What does being 'bravely British' mean by the author?
(b) How were the engineers 'bravely British'?
(c) Why were the engineers a hundred feet or more below the boat deck?
20. 'In her last minutes the Titanic stood almost perpendicular
Describe the last minutes of Titanic and many of the passengers who sank with her.
21. What was the 'most pathetic and horrible' sight to the men in the lifeboats?
